## Overview of the labs

You are now starting a series of eight computer labs, each lasting four hours. The goals of these labs are to familiarize you with bioinformatics tools and practices, and to complete a project that is relatively close to some questions bioinformaticians and biologists are working with today. We made an effort to link the labs to each other; however, should you have troubles to complete one lab we will help you (for example by providing intermediate results) so you are not penalized for the following labs.

The first two labs are for you to learn basics which you will come back during the entire course: familiarize you with the UNIX system and command line, bash scripting, python etc. You will also start to manipulate some of the files and learn about file formats that you will use throughout the course (such as fasta files).

Labs 3 to 5 focus on the mitochondrial genome. Mitochondrial genomes come in a lot of flavors, but we selected short and circular mitochondrial genomes from a few model species such as fruit fly, nematodes, mouse and humans. You will circularize a mitochondrial genome, annotate it using different tools, and finally compare the results for the different species. These three labs are based on a course described in 'A CURE-based approach to teaching genomics using mitochondrial genomes, CourseSource 2019, Pogoda et al' and the accompanying document 'A guide to organellar genome assembly and annotation', Pogoda et al.

Labs 6 to 8 form a project during which you will receive a question of evolutionary interest (for example, is species X more related to species Y or to species Z?). To answer that question, you will have to select mitochondrial and autosomal sequences from relevant species, choose an appropriate outgroup, and compare your sequences in appropriate ways, for example by building phylogenetic trees. You will re-use data that you created during labs 3 to 5.

We ask you to work on your own, as we know from experience that when two or more people work on the same computer, the one who gets most of it is the person typing. However, we want you to communicate with each other and help each other out, as we also know from experience that explaining something to someone else (for example) is a very efficient way of learning! To this end, we included several moments in the labs where you should discuss your results with colleagues.

We will use different ways of grading the labs - these will be described in the respective protocols. Keep in mind that the reports are mostly for us to make sure that you go through the tutorials and that you understood what you did. We encourage you to submit the reports as we progress through the labs, that way you will get the most out of the labs and out of your teachers!
<!-- If we include a 'bioinformatic good practices check-list' it should be mentioned here.) -->

Finally, the labs you are working with this year are new or have been substantially modified compared to previous versions of this course. We did our best to make them informative and interesting, and for them to run smoothly. We welcome any comments and suggestions for improvement - do not hesitate to write them down as we go along as you might have forgotten a lot of comments by the time you fill the course evaluation! This will be very helpful for the teachers and future students. Thank you!


<!-- I think we should keep the same structure for all the labs, with for example: goal of the particular lab + how it fits with the other labs; background information if necessary; input (what they receive); outputs (what they create - which can also be input for other steps obviously); tools they will use; steps; format of report; something else? further reading? link to specific notions in the course? (both bioinformatics and genomics parts) In one of the later labs, we could even have them fill some of the steps e.g. output and tools as a task. -->

## General introduction to labs 3 to 5

<!-- Complete and improve! -->
In these three labs, you will focus on the mitochondrial genome. Mitochondria are present in all eukaryotic organisms (for a review, see 'Origin and diversification of mitochondria', Roger et al.). Mitochondria supply the cells with energy. However, this is not what we are interested in here. We will focus on the mitochondrial genome. Mitochondrial genomes come in many different flavors, vary in size, shape (circular, linear, several pieces), content etc. However, some protein-coding genes, as well as rRNA and tRNA are very commonly found in mitochondrial genomes, making them useful for establishing phylogenies (more on that in labs 6-8). Mitochondrial genomes are usually quite short (16,000 base pairs in humans), and present in many copies in the cells; thus, they are easy to sequence even in extreme cases like environmental DNA or ancient DNA studies.

Your main task is to annotate the mitochondrial genome of one of the following organisms: human, mouse, fruit fly or nematode. You will first need to assemble the mitochondrial genome, and in the end, you will work with colleagues who annotated the mitochondrial genomes of the three other species and identify similarities and differences. You will need what you learned during labs 1 and 2 to complete your tasks, and you will use some parts of your annotated mitochondrial genome and that of your colleagues during labs 6 to 8.

The steps you will follow in labs 3 (assembling the genome) and 4 (annotation) are similar to what you would do if you were to annotate a new mitochondrial genome. However as the goal of these labs is to familiarize you with bioinformatics rather than with annotation, in particular, we chose to work with model organisms, for which annotated genomes are already annotated. This means that your task will be greatly simplified. However, you should be able to use the same tools to annotate a new mitochondrial genome if you wish too!

